# Reflective-C
`Reflective-C` is an experiment in C reflective programming and metaprogramming. This means inspecting the source code and programmatically generating new code from it.
The current goal of the project is to generate print functions for arbitrary C structs, akin to `deriving Show` in Haskell programs.

The basic idea is to have a non-intrusive, editor-compatible way of doing metaprogramming in C. `reflective-c` is a library on top of C as opposed to a whole new language.

## Usage
When defining your struct, prepend the `BL_REFLECT_PRINT` macro with the name of your struct. 
This will mark that `reflect` should generate a print function signature that can be used by the rest of your program. Here is an example from `examples/structs.`
    
    BL_REFLECT_PRINT(vec3); // Note this macro!
    struct vec3 {
      float x;
      float y;
      float z;
    };
    
    int main() {
      vec3 obj = {1.0, 2.0, 3.0};
      print_vec3(&obj);
      return 0;
    }

The macro has two purposes:
1. It generates a function header for the `print_vec3` function, so that your compiler and LSP can know of it before it is generated 
2. It is used as a trigger for the `reflect` program to generate a function based on the struct following it

This move is inspired by Rich Harris' musings of hijacking the `$:` syntax in JavaScript for Svelte. We can add a step to our build system and expand on our C compiler's capabilities, but without confusing our compiler or LSP with new syntax.
Goto definition should even work as usual once the file is generated.


To see this in action, run the command

    $ make codegen

If you now look in the `gen` folder, you can see a new file, `vec3.c`. This contains the generated `print_vec3` for the struct.

    #include <bl/string_builder.h>
    struct vec3 {
      float x;
      float y;
      float z;
    };
    void print_vec3(struct vec3* obj) {
      string_builder* b = new_builder(128);
      add_to(b, "struct vec3  { ");
      add_to(b, "x: %f ", obj->x);
      add_to(b, "y: %f ", obj->y);
      add_to(b, "z: %f ", obj->z);
      add_to(b, "};");
      printf("%s\n", to_string(b));
    };
(Note that out of convenience I am using my string builder library both in the actual code generation and in the emitted code).

This file be linked to your normal project project

When you compile and run `examples/vec3.c`, you should see the following printed to your console.

    $ make example
    struct vec3  { x: 1.000000 y: 2.000000 z: 3.000000 };

Here, the final compiled file is using the print function generated by `reflect`.
When compiling the file `examples/vec3.c`, all the files in the `gen` folder are linked:

    gcc -Iinclude -Isrc examples/vec3.c gen/*.c -o build/example

## Shortcomings and further work
This project is very much an experiment in its early beginnings!
Expanding the parser to comply with more of C's syntax will allow more use cases. Some ideas include
* General serialization generators (json, csv)
* Creating initialization functions for structs
* Deriving equality checks for structs
* AST analysis (custom errors)
* Creating a utility for safe pattern matching
